

The tale is told.  The world moves on, the sun shines as brightly as
before, the flowers bloom as beautifully, the birds sing their carols as
sweetly, the trees nod and bow their leafy tops as if slumbering in the
breeze, the gentle winds fan our brow and kiss our cheek as they pass by,
the pale moon sheds her silvery sheen, the blue dome of the sky sparkles
with the trembling stars that twinkle and shine and make night beautiful,
and the scene melts and gradually disappears forever.

                                 THE END.




Appendix: Transcription notes:

About "Company Aytch":

  "Company Aytch" was printed as a series of newspaper articles in
  1881-1882.

  First printed in book form, 2000 copies, in 1882.

  Second printing of 2000 copies in 1900.

  Reprinted in 1952 with an introduction and commentary by
  Bell Irvin Wiley.

  10 or more printings by Collier Books starting in 1962, with an
  introduction by Roy P. Basler.


The following modifications were applied while transcribing the
printed book to etext:

  Quite a few of the sub-headings in the book were printed with a
  trailing period, while the majority were not.  For example, in
  chapter 11:
    SHOOTING A DESERTER.   versus   TARGET SHOOTING
    DR. C. T. QUINTARD.   versus   GENERAL JOSEPH E. JOHNSTON
  For the sake of consistency, I have removed these trailing periods.

  Chapter 10
    Page 123, para 3, fix typo "minne ball"

  Chapter 12
    Page 168, para 1, fix typo "Breckenridge"

  The following words were sometimes printed hyphenated, sometimes
  not.  In this etext, they are not hyphenated:
    arch-angel  battle-fields  foot-lights  grave-yard  hill-side
    horse-back  re-organization  shot-gun  up-stairs/down-stairs

  The following words were sometimes printed hyphenated, sometimes
  not.  In this etext, they are hyphenated:
    battle-flags

  The following words were printed using the "ae" or "oe" ligature:
    Caesar  diarrhoea  Thermopylae


I did not change the following:
  Some words in this book appear to be mis-spelled, at least by
  current usage:
    descendents  geneology

  The author, intentionally or not, consistently mis-spelled
  several names, including those of Capt./Col. Hume R. Feild and
  Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston







